---
firstName: 'Stefaan G.'
lastName: Verhulst
jobtitle: Co-Founder and Chief of R&D
organization: The GovLab, New York University
avatar: ../assets/stefaan-verhulst.jpg
---

Stefaan G. Verhulst is Co-Founder and Chief Research and Development Officer of
the Governance Laboratory @NYU (GovLab) where he is responsible for building a
research foundation on how to transform governance using advances in science and
technology.

Verhulst's latest scholarship centers on how technology can improve people's
lives and the creation of more effective and collaborative forms of governance.
Specifically, he is interested in the perils and promise of collaborative
technologies and how to harness the unprecedented volume of information to
advance the public good.

Before joining NYU full time, Verhulst spent more than a decade as Chief of
Research for the Markle Foundation, where he continues to serve as Senior
Advisor. At Markle, an operational foundation based in New York, he was
responsible for overseeing strategic research on all the priority areas of the
Foundation including, for instance: transforming health care using information
and technology, re-engineering government to respond to new national security
threats, improving people's lives in developing countries by connecting them to
information networks, developing multi-stakeholder networks to tackle global
governance challenges, changing education through information technology et al.
Many of Markle's reports have been translated into legislation and executive
orders, and have informed the creation of new organizations and businesses.

He is also an Adjunct Professor in the Department of Culture and Communications
at New York University, Senior Research Fellow for the Center for Media and
Communications Studies at Central European University in Budapest; and an
Affiliated Senior Research Fellow at the Center for Global Communications
Studies at the University of Pennsylvania's Annenberg School for Communications.
Previously at Oxford University he co-founded and was the Head of the Programme
in Comparative Media Law and Policy at the Centre for Socio Legal Studies, and
also served as Senior Research Fellow of Wolfson College. He is still an
emeritus fellow at Oxford. He also taught several years at the London School of
Economics.

Verhulst was the UNESCO Chairholder in Communications Law and Policy for the UK,
a former lecturer on Communications Law and Policy issues in Belgium, and
Founder and Co-Director of the International Media and Info-Comms Policy and Law
Studies at the University of Glasgow School of Law. He has served as a
consultant to numerous international and national organizations, including the
Council of Europe, the European Commission, UNESCO, World Bank, UNDP, USAID, the
UK Department for International Development among others. He has been a grant
recipient of the Bertelsmann Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller
Foundation, and the Markle Foundation.

Verhulst has authored and co-authored several books, including: In Search of the
Self: Conceptual Approaches to Internet Self Regulation (Routledge, 2001);
Convergence in European Communications Regulation (Blackstone, 1999); EC Media
Law and Policy (AWL, 1998); Legal Responses to the Changing Media (OUP, 1998);
and Broadcasting Reform in India (OUP, 1998) and The Routledge Handbook of Media
Law (2013).

Latest reports and papers include, for instance, Innovations in Global
Governance: Toward a Distributed Internet Governance Ecosystem (2014) and The
Open Data Era in Health and Social Care (2014), and are also available
[here](https://ssrn.com/author=412382) . Verhulst blogs also regularly on a
variety of topics. For instance: Data Collaboratives: Exchanging Data to Improve
People's Lives (2015), and Reimagining Cities (2014).

Verhulst is also founder and editor of numerous journals including the
International Journal of Communications Law and Policy, and the Communications
Law in Transition Newsletter. Currently he is the Curator and Editor of the
[Govlab Weekly Digest](http://thegovlab.org/category/govlab-digest/).
