---
title: A crucial opportunity
date: 2016-09-29
authors:
  - stefan-schweinfest
---

The 17 [Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)](https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs), adopted one year ago by world leaders as part of the [2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development](https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld), are unprecedented in their scope and vision of a better future for people and the planet. The [169 targets and 230 indicators](https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/indicators-list/) agreed through the SDG process are also unprecedented in their scope setting out what needs to be measured to monitor progress, inform decision-making and hold governments accountable on the 2030 Agenda.

Now we in the statistics and data communities have to rise to this huge challenge to put in place the systems to gather and analyze the data needed, and to fill the many data gaps, using all the tools at our disposal from both traditional and innovative sources, strengthening national statistical systems and also tapping into the vast reach of the [data revolution](http://www.undatarevolution.org/).

At the same time, the Member States of the United Nations, through the [United Nations Statistical Commission](http://unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/), have given us a crucial new opportunity to succeed in addressing the SDG challenge: the United Nations World Data Forum. The United Nations Statistical Commission agreed in March 2016 that such a forum, to be held every two years, would be the suitable platform to intensify cooperation across the professional data community. This agreement was based on a recommendation by the United Nations Secretary-General's Independent Expert and Advisory Group on a Data Revolution for Sustainable Development, in its 2014 report, [_A World that Counts_](http://www.undatarevolution.org/report/).

Our long-time friends at [Statistics South Africa](http://www.statssa.gov.za/), led by Pali Lehohla, have stepped up to the plate and offered to host the first-ever United Nations World Data Forum in Cape Town, South Africa, from 15–18 January 2017. And we at the United Nations Statistics Division, are taking our responsibility to serve as secretariat for the United Nations World Data Forum very seriously, as requested by the United Nations Statistical Commission. We are bringing together major partners and players to help plan the United Nations World Data Forum so that it will be a fruitful vehicle for collaboration, where new initiatives will be launched and solutions presented that will help deliver better data for sustainable development. Data labs and interactive platforms, along with more traditional panel discussions, will give all participants the opportunity to contribute their ideas and talents.

As I often say, sustainable development will need to be supported by sustainable statistics and data. The data revolution calls for new methodologies and new data, increasingly disaggregated and yet integrated, data from traditional as well as new sources, incorporating geospatial dimensions, data that are real-time and open. The rapid developments underway in IT will of course help, but to truly satisfy these demands, the professional statistical community will have to continuously strive to transform and modernize national statistical systems under the leadership of the National Statistical Offices.

I was once asked what I saw as the three main elements of the data revolution, and I said capacity, capacity and capacity -- financial, human and institutional capacity. In building such capacity, we can only be successful if the statistical community has strong support and full political backing from the highest national authorities, and works in collaboration with a wide range of players. The attention and collaboration that have been growing in recent years and that will be boosted by the United Nations World Data Forum will be of immense help in generating the resources and partnerships needed to deliver the results everyone wants.
To make this work, we need everyone's capacities and viewpoints from across the data ecosystem from National Statistical Offices, the private sector, the United Nations system and international organizations, from civil society and the scientific and academic communities. We enthusiastically hope that many of you will be able to come to Cape Town in January 2017 to join in the first United Nations World Data Forum, and contribute to its outcomes and success.
