---
title:
  Catalyzing the use and impact of official statistics for sustainable
  development
date: 2018-08-27
authors:
  - deirdre-appel
images:
  - ../assets/posts/CapacityDevData.jpg
  - ../assets/posts/NSO_dataUsage.jpg
---

import Img from 'gatsby-image';
import { Box } from 'theme-ui';

The first United Nations World Data Forum launched the
[Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Development Data (CTGAP)](https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/hlg/cape-town-global-action-plan/),
an ambitious yet essential commitment to innovate and modernize national
statistical systems, among other priorities. As policymakers, development
partners and other data advocates prepare to gather at the second United Nations
World Data Forum in Dubai in October, it is an opportune moment to ask how these
various actors can effectively implement this Plan.

A critical piece of this puzzle is to be able to better support National
Statistical Offices (NSOs) in increasing the use and impact of official
statistics and facilitating better data dissemination strategies.
[Open Data Watch (ODW)](https://opendatawatch.com/),
[AidData](https://www.aiddata.org/) and the
[Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21th Century (PARIS21)](https://paris21.org/)
have teamed up to address these two needs through an exciting, collaborative
research study. (Financial support for this study was provided by the Hewlett
Foundation). This blog presents a preview of findings from this two-part
project, ahead of our session where we will launch the full report at the United
Nations World Data Forum.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has placed increased demands on NSOs
in terms of the quantity and quality of data that needs to be collected to
effectively monitor the
[Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)](https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/).
The CTGAP is a global plan for the planning and implementation of statistical
capacity building necessary to achieve the scope and intent of the 2030 Agenda.
The national statistical system - NSOs and other agencies designated to collect,
compile and disseminate official statistics â€” is central to making progress on
its six strategic areas (Figure 1).

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[0]}
    title="Figure 1: Six strategic areas of the Cape Town Global Action Plan."
    alt="Six strategic areas of the Cape Town Global Action Plan: (1) Coordination and strategic leadership on data for sustainable development; (2) Innovation and modernization of national statistical systems; (3) Strengthening of basic statistical activities and programmes, with particular focus on addressing the monitoring needs of the 2030 Agenda; (4) Dissemination and use of sustainable development data; (5) Multi-stakeholder partnerships for sustainable development data; (6) Mobilize resources and coordinate efforts for statistical capacity building."
  />
</Box>

However, despite the increased demand for development data from NSOs, there are
[barriers that limit the full potential of official statistics](https://www.aiddata.org/publications/avoiding-data-graveyards-insights-from-data-producers-users-in-three-countries)
to bring about the desired change in society. Some of these include, but are not
limited to, the timeliness and perceptions of accuracy of the data, due to both
technical and political constraints. In sum, there remains a broken link in the
data value chain between the production of official statistics and its
dissemination and use.

To close the gap between production of official statistics on the one hand, and
its dissemination and use on the other, development partners and other actors
need a better understanding of the NSO perspective and the barriers they face
with disseminating, monitoring and increasing data use. And to assist the
modernization of statistical systems, an analysis of usage statistics from
national data portals and NSO websites is also necessary.

## Snap poll reveals a strong demand for monitoring data use among NSOs

To capture the producer perspective on official statistics, AidData sent an
online snap poll to senior- and mid-level officials in NSOs in 140 low- and
middle-income countries. The survey covered four broad topics: the most
important and frequent users of data produced by NSOs, current monitoring of
data use and dissemination methods, the key improvements to encourage data use,
and what they need to make those improvements. Around 390 officials responded to
the survey, for a response rate of 32 percent.

Contrary to what might be expected based on their primary mandate to collect,
analyze and disseminate data, most NSOs reported monitoring the use of data they
produced. _Among the 40 percent who said they did not currently measure the use
of their data, 90 percent said that it was very important or quite important for
the NSO to be able to measure the use of data it produces._ This suggests that
NSOs see the value of monitoring data use, but may not be currently doing it
either due to other competing priorities or capacity constraints.

The most common way of monitoring data use was through web analytics. _While
more than 70 percent of those that currently monitored data use did it through
web analytics, more than 85 percent of those that would like to monitor data use
also chose this as their preferred way (Figure 2)._ This suggests that NSOs that
do not currently monitor data use would appreciate support in using web
analytics for their data portals or websites hosting official statistics.

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[1]}
    title="Figure 2: Current ways that NSOs monitor the use of data they produce."
    alt="Bar chart with current 7 ways that NSOs monitor the use of data they produce."
  />
</Box>

_Note_: This figure is based on the question: How do you measure the use of data
produced by NSOs? The question was only asked to those respondents that said
they monitor data use. Respondents could select all that apply. Data labels
represent the number of respondents that selected a certain response option.

## Monitoring data portals reveals a preference for economic statistics among users

One of the objectives under the CTGAP is to "develop and promote innovative
strategies to ensure proper dissemination and use of data for sustainable
development." To aid efforts to publish official statistics in open data formats
for measuring and tracking development progress, several NSOs have created
national data portals or platforms. Our snap poll findings point to a demand for
effectively monitoring and analyzing how data are accessed, particularly through
web analytics.

The second part of this project, conducted in partnership with PARIS21, was
designed to help countries understand how users access official statistics
through NSO websites. By analyzing user activity on these websites using Google
Analytics, countries can learn more about who is accessing their website and
what interests these users may have. Initial findings show that the vast
majority of users accessing these websites come from within the country itself.
This could include government officials, academics, citizens, and staff of
international organizations based in that country.

_Economic-related statistics seem to be the most popular, as the pages hosting
these statistics are the most visited pages on NSO websites, with some
additional interest in social data on population and poverty_. Aside from pages
related to official statistics, pages related to job opportunities with the NSO
receive a great deal of web traffic.

## Informing future statistical capacity building initiatives

Insights from the snap poll and the data portals study reveal the producer and
user perspective on the use of official statistics. By identifying the key
barriers to use, the most effective dissemination strategies and organizational
needs of NSOs, this study will inform the efforts of development partners,
governments and civil society organizations in implementing the CTGAP. The
recommendations can help align future approaches to statistical capacity
building with what NSOs need the most.

While this blog only provided a sneak peek into what we're learning from this
joint research, the World Data Forum presents an excellent forum to share the
findings and recommendations from the full report widely, and spur a discussion
around the use and monitoring of official statistics at the session "New
Engagement Approaches for NSOs to Increase Data Use" on October 23.
[ODW](https://opendatawatch.com/), [AidData](https://www.aiddata.org/) and the
[PARIS21](https://paris21.org/) look forward to engaging with NSOs, development
partners and data advocates to narrow the gap between production and use of
official statistics and implementing initiatives that can maximize the impact of
this data.
