---
title:
  'Tell me why it matters: connecting the dots between having data and seeing
  impact'
date: 2018-09-10
authors:
  - emily-courey-pryor
---

Over the last five years, we have all worked hard to help data gain its place as
a key part of the global development conversation. The United Nations World Data
Forum is testament to this as data and statistics enthusiasts gather for the
second time this October in Dubai.

However, I believe that for our work to stay on the agenda and reach outside the
data community, we must find ways to move beyond an acknowledgement that having
better data is important and show in practical terms how having better data
leads to positive outcomes. Often in our quest to communicate the importance of
data (more complete, more timely, more inclusive) we focus on how to improve our
methods, explore new data sources, and increase our overall data production.
That work will always be critical, alongside increased and sustained funding to
support it. However, we all know that data only has power if it is both
collected _and_ used to inform decision-making and drive change within
communities. And data funding can only be sustained when those directing
financial resources, whether public or private, have a clear understanding of
how quality data helps solve important problems and answer critical questions
and, in turn, an understanding of the risks created when data is _not_
available.

So how can we, as the data community, strengthen and help encourage data use?
How can we increase the number of participants in this conversation and ensure
its longevity? One way is to do a better job of collecting and sharing stories
of data impact stories that directly demonstrate how the use of good data has
led to positive change at the local, national, or global level.

At [Data2X](https://www.data2x.org), we believe these types of data impact
stories are a crucial tool for encouraging data use and building a coalition of
data supporters beyond our immediate community. We believe that real-life
examples of data use leading to improved outcomes can help "make the case" for
data. And yet, at least in gender data, stories where we can validate true
impact, rather than only anecdotal stories, are not easy to trace in part due to
the long-standing and persistent gaps in gender data, and in part because there
was no concerted effort to compile these stories.

To address this issue, earlier this year Data2X, along with
[Open Data Watch](https://opendatawatch.com/) and
[Devex](https://www.devex.com/),
[put out a call for gender data impact stories](https://www.devex.com/news/sponsored/opinion-once-upon-a-statistic-why-we-re-calling-for-gender-data-impact-stories-91806).
Our aim was to gather and share stories where use of gender data led to a
positive change on government policies, legislation, or societal attitudes and
practices that affect women and girls. Through this work we have documented the
creation of a national care policy using data measuring women's unpaid care work
in Uruguay; we found evidence for wide-scale legislative, advocacy, and
financial action spurred by the collection of domestic violence data in Vietnam;
and more.

We look forward to sharing some of these stories during a panel at the United
Nations World Data Forum. We hope you will join us to explore how data impact
stories can help encourage data use and contribute to efforts to drive increased
funding in this space. And, we hope that sharing these stories will help our
joint efforts to surface more stories, answer the critical "why it matters"
question about data, and ensure that data retains an important place within the
global development conversation.
