---
title: Hybrid census to generate spatially-disaggregated population estimates
date: 2018-10-08
authors:
  - bahadur-hellali
images:
  - ../assets/posts/HybridCensusAFG.jpg
---

import Img from 'gatsby-image';
import { Box } from 'theme-ui';

Housing census data and up-to-date population data at subnational levels are
some of the basic data needs any country should possess to ensure efficient
planning and delivery of services, effective development programming, election
preparation and timely response to disasters. In countries like Afghanistan,
where we face challenges on different fronts, including the collection of timely
data, access to recent and reliable local-level demographic data is challenging.
National population data is outdated and excludes key groups. Similarly, high
rates of migration and urban growth make existing population data quickly
outdated.

The last national population census in Afghanistan was conducted in 1979, and
this census covered only 67 percent of the districts in the country due to
security issues. Recent plans to conduct a full population census have also been
hampered by ongoing insecurity and it is unlikely a population census will be
conducted in the near future. Current national and subnational population
estimates are based largely on projected population counts using a 2.03 percent
growth rate from a 1979 baseline population, updated with information from
pre-census household listing activities, where available. Current estimates
using these approaches put Afghanistan's population at 31.5 million in 2018.
However, analyses show that under scenarios of growth rates differing by only 1
percentage point, as recent data suggest is possible, the national population
could be as low as 19.1 million or as high as 40 million.

Given the urgent need for reliable and accurate national population data, the
government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) requested assistance
from the United Nations to generate quick population counts and structures that
would feed into the planning and programming system of the government. Several
organizations, including United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA); WorldPop at the
University of Southampton, UK; Flowminder; Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and
National Statistics and Information Authority of Afghanistan (NSIA), formerly
known as Central Statistics Organization (CSO), committed to working together
and developed an innovative methodology to generate geospatially-disaggregated
national and subnational population estimates a hybrid census. This joint effort
facilitated the updating of current population distribution data through the use
of updated satellite imagery and/or remote sensing and survey data, in lieu of a
census.

The goal of a hybrid census is to produce population estimates for small areas
of uniform, detailed grids in the absence of a traditional national census.
Hybrid censuses rely on complete counts of population within small, defined
areas, through 'micro-census surveys', selected across an area of interest, and
collected relatively rapidly and at a fraction of the cost of a full national
census. Statistical models are then used to link these micro-census data to
spatial data with full coverage over the regions of interest to predict
population numbers in the unsampled locations. By aggregating these
high-resolution predictions, population totals can also be produced for
administrative units or for the national level, if required.

The hybrid census project' to generate geospatially-disaggregated population
estimates was planned 2015 and its pilot was initiated in March 2016. The
initial pilot was conducted in three selected provinces using Socio-Demographic
and Economic Survey (SDES) data, recent satellite imagery and a geospatial
dataset. In October 2016, upon successful completion of the pilot phase, a
statistical model was developed to produce population estimates for all 34
provinces using 9 provinces' SDES data and 19 provinces' micro-census survey
data. The final population estimates were released in June/July 2017. By using
the existing data, high-resolution satellite imagery and computer-vision based
approaches, the statistical model was able to predict numbers in areas where no
population data were previously available, and it was possible to generate high
resolution maps of population estimates disaggregated by age and sex, together
with uncertainty metrics.

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[0]}
    title="Figure 1. Satellite imagery of a rural area of Afghanistan."
    alt="(left) High resolution satellite imagery of a rural area of Afghanistan; (right) Settlement areas detected automatically by computer algorithms."
  />
</Box>

> **Figure 1. Satellite imagery of a rural area of Afghanistan.** _(left) High
> resolution satellite imagery of a rural area of Afghanistan; (right)
> Settlement areas detected automatically by computer algorithms._

We understand the hybrid census approach can never replace the rich production
of data on the individual, family, household or community that is generated by a
traditional population and housing census. However, at present, we are unable to
fully execute a traditional census at the national level due to insecurity and
high costs. The hybrid census approach can be used to produce population
estimates for small areas or uniform, detailed grids in the absence of
traditional census data.

The data will be used to support decision-making and the measurement of SDG
indicators. Of the 232 SDG indicators, up to 98 require population data for
their calculation. The collaboration has also contributed to further
strengthening capacities of the NSIA and other related government agencies to
generate population estimates based on the integration of geospatial data and
ground surveys.

In order to meet the future need of maintaining reliable and up-to-date national
population data using hybrid census, NSIA aims to strengthen its institutional
capacity and work with partners. NSIA plans an Afghan-owned and led effort with
technical assistance from partners to conduct the next hybrid census and
advocate for the public acceptance of hybrid generated population census data.

We appreciate the efforts of UNFPA, WorldPop at the University of Southampton,
Flowminder, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation in providing assistance to conduct
the project, and we look forward to long-term technical support and partnerships
to assist National Statistics and Information Authority (NSIA) in adopting this
innovative methodology institutionally.

The Afghanistan National Statistics and Information Authority looks forward to
presenting our work at the upcoming United Nations World Data Forum in the
session entitled "SDG Data Challenges and Opportunities: Geospatial Reference,
Infrastructure and Demographic Data for Development". We look forward to sharing
our experiences and discussing how hybrid censuses can support other countries
in enhancing their developments, while also learning from others at the Forum
new and innovative strategies to boost national data availability.
