---
title: 'Looking back and looking forward'
date: 2017-01-30
authors:
  - stefan-schweinfest
---

We did it! The first United Nations World Data Forum in Cape Town, South Africa,
brought together an impressive group of data producers and users from the public
and private sectors, policy makers, academia, and civil society representatives,
to find ways in which we can, together, harness the power of data for
sustainable development.

The United Nations World Data Forum provided a unique opportunity for technical
and policy-level discussions geared towards producing and using data and
statistics to ensure progress towards the 2030 Agenda.

The buzz from the 1500 participants from 100+ countries confirmed that the
United Nations World Data Forum was a great success. In almost 100 sessions,
innovative ideas were explored, pledges were made, and proposals for concrete
data solutions were presented.

We still face serious data gaps all over the world, and data that does exist is
insufficient in both quantity and detail. It's time to roll up our sleeves and
put all the ideas and solutions that emerged from Cape Town into action.

## We need to work together

The exponential growth in data sources--from mobile phones to administrative
records, from satellite imagery to all kinds of citizen-generated data--, and
the continuous innovation in technologies and methods to collect, analyze and
disseminate data and statistics, present us with vast opportunities to produce
the information needed by citizens and policymakers to make better decisions and
improve people's lives.

We need, more than ever, official statistical systems that provide clear rules,
standards, and principles for a new "data architecture." Having clear standards
will help protect individuals' privacy and boost statistical capacity, while
enabling decision makers at all level to access the data that they need.

At this first United Nations World Data Forum, we launched
[the Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Development Data](https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/hlg/cape-town-global-action-plan/).
The Cape Town Global Action Plan calls governments, policy leaders and the
international community to undertake key actions in six strategic areas,
including: coordination and leadership; innovation and modernization of national
statistical systems; strengthening of statistical activities and
programmes;dissemination of data on sustainable development; building
partnerships; and mobilizing resources. It is expected to be adopted by the
United Nations Statistical Commission in March this year.

It is an ambitious plan that serves an organizing framework to put a process in
place at the global level and in every country. It is a plan that aims to
strengthen systems to provide detailed data to ensure that no one is left
behind.

I invite all of you, as members of the global data community, to use the Cape
Town Plan as a unifier, as you implement your regional, national and local road
maps.

As I highlighted throughout the United Nations World Data Forum in Cape Town, at
this stage the Global Action Plan is a "to-do list." We, as the members of the
global data and statistics community, need to step up and fill in the blanks:
Who is going to do it, when, and how?

I want to emphasize that the Cape Town Global Action Plan is a living document
that will be updated as we move forward. As we carry forward the conversation
that started in this January in Cape Town, let's fill this matrix with true
action, so that when we come back for the next United Nations World Data Forum,
we can proudly take stock of our common achievements.

## So where do we go from here?

In the face of challenges from the 2030 Agenda, we need to have the right tools
to ensure that we collect high quality, timely and disaggregated data. The first
United Nations World Data Forum was a launching pad for innovative ideas and
solutions for the production and use of better data for sustainable development,
and an opportunity to get behind the Cape Town Global Action Plan for Data. It
has also given us the momentum to raise awareness of the critical role that data
plays in a fast and ever-changing world.

Until the next United Nations World Data Forum, I will be knocking on a lot of
doors and following up with our data partners, governments and institutions, to
ensure that we keep this momentum going.

I feel strongly that we need systems in place so that countries can make the
best use of existing data, and that institutions talk to each other to ensure
that their data resources are put to work in support of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Most countries already have vast sources of data waiting to be used, but this
information is often poorly organized and difficult to access and integrate into
the statistical production process. There is still a lot we can do better. We
need to ensure governments commit more resources to their data collection and
monitoring processes. We also need to ensure that the international support for
statistical capacity and data literacy is coordinated. While we prepare to meet
again at the next United Nations World Data Forum in less than two years, we do
not need to wait to take action.

I look forward to more collaboration and exchanges and a growing consensus on
data principles and other policy issues until we meet again in less than two
years in Dubai for the second United Nations World Data Forum.
