---
title:
  'Suspicious minds: trust and releasing the potential of public-private
  partnerships in statistical capacity development'
date: 2018-09-27
authors:
  - matthew-shearing
---

The debate about public-private partnerships (PPPs) in official statistics has
often been focused on how statisticians can get hold of the data they covet from
the private sector. This risks not paying enough attention to other improved and
new types of public-private partnerships for capacity development which could
drive innovation, lower costs, leverage funding, and even produce and
disseminate data.

But whatever the area of collaboration, we must do something about the fear,
misconceptions, and ultimately, the lack of trust which is limiting the vision,
clouding the thinking, and holding back the potential on both sides.

The United Nations World Data Forum in Dubai showcases the theme of _New
approaches to capacity development for better data_. This should help us develop
new ways to work across traditional boundaries. There are already many good
examples and ideas of how different sectors can work together. We need to share
and learn from these. But to make this meaningful, we need to make big strides
in the way we think about each other. While true love between the private and
public sectors may never be realistic, the demands of 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development force us to look at how we can at least build a
"marriage of convenience".

Like any effective relationship, the two sides should combine their strengths to
achieve things they could not do alone, and it is not a purely transactional
relationship. The foundation must be trust. But we must recognise there are some
large elephants in the room, built on half-truths and misconceptions, fuelled by
a lack of knowledge.

For the public sector, there are suspicions that the private sector does not
really care about results, ethics are optional, and that money spent through the
private sector on capacity development is syphoned-off into profits.

Publicly-funded bodies also fear that the public will not stomach a "date" let
alone a "marriage" with the private sector. Or rather, partnerships with the
private sector are the thin end of a wedge that threatens the existence of
official statistics. But the big reality check for official statistics is that
without collaboration in moving towards the efficiency, innovation, expertise,
data, and delivery-focus offered by external partners, the public and
politicians are likely in any case to lose faith in official statistics. Yes,
the big existential questions are scary, but they need to be addressed,
urgently. They affect capacity-building as much as any other areas of official
statistics. By developing strong models of partnership in capacity-building, we
can light the way on the broader crisis of identity in official statistics.

On the other hand, the private sector suspects that data shared with the public
sector will scare off customers due to fear of big brother and working with the
public sector is prohibitively difficult, risks inefficiency (not least because
many Nations Statistical Offices (NSOs) may effectively overcharge for their
capacity development services) and strangle innovation. But there is an enormous
space for official statisticians to prove their worth more widely to the private
sector and even trade with it in some way, for example, in areas such as
managing data quality and confidentiality.

Another big concern for the private sector is bureaucracy. However, there are
already good examples of innovative collaborations that develop capacity while
navigating successfully around public sector bureaucracy. But there are also
examples of the public sector using this bureaucracy as an excuse not to engage
with the private sector. Are statistics laws and departmental regulations really
that restrictive, or is it a distrustful fixed mindset that is restricting the
possibilities of action? Once we recognise these kinds of elephants we can
develop actions that build the trust we need.

There are four possible areas of trust-building we need to examine. Like most
successful marriages, PPPs in statistics require:

1. a deep understanding of each other's needs and fears,
1. rules and boundaries that frame the relationship and provide security,
1. a track record (examples/benchmarks) of good behaviour, and
1. recognition and support by the society around us.

The last on the list is particularly important, as businesses, their customers,
and the general public all need to trust that the "marriage" can work in order
to provide the support (and, in this case, the data) needed for it to work. For
this, we will first need a thoughtful consideration of rules and boundaries but,
perhaps more importantly, also how we present ourselves to the society around
us.

We will not solve all of the challenges at this year's United Nations World Data
Forum. However, we should be able to agree on actions that continue to build
trust and develop models for capacity-building that are cross-sectoral,
efficient, and mutually beneficial. The United Nations World Data Forum will see
a wide mix of the actors and sectors that are usually involved in capacity
development projects in statistics gathering together, such as technical service
providers, NSOs in cooperation with each other, regional and international
bodies, specialised companies (such as in IT and data science), and independent
individual consultants. They all should play a continued role in capacity
building. We need to unpack our respective strengths and develop working models
that get the most out of each of type of partner, the most out of the resources
available, and can leverage more resources.

To do this, we will need to openly acknowledge the necessary trade-offs in the
way we design models of partnership, which in itself should help build trust.
Just a few examples include:

- NSOs may offer expensive capacity-building services, but they offer essential
  types of expertise,
- the private sector may not have off-the-shelf solutions that will fit any NSO,
  but they have the capacity to innovate and apply technology in ways not
  possible by an NSO, and
- technical service providers, rather than syphoning investment into profits,
  can mobilise and coordinate expertise efficiently and drive down costs,
  without necessarily having in-depth technical expertise themselves.

In Dubai, I will be speaking on this topic in the session Impact measurement,
SDGs and support to official statistics â€“ the role of private sector and
partnerships (TA1.04) run by the
[GOPA Consulting Group](https://www.gopa-group.org/), a technical service
provider in capacity-building, jointly with [UNDP](https://www.undp.org/). This
session also includes speakers from an NSO and representatives from other
sectors. This session and other sessions will provide a valuable opportunity for
us all to share evidence, ideas and perspectives. I also look forward to
receiving responses to this blog post with your thoughts and ideas to keep the
conversation going.
