---
title: Reflections on the United Nations World Data Forum
date: 2016-11-22
authors:
  - niels-ploug
---

As the weather is getting bad and the dark is getting even darker -it is winter
in the North- we are working even harder on our part of the program for the _UN
World Data Forum_. We will be there to exchange with old and new friends our
experiences on how to use data from administrative sources to produce official
statistics in an efficient and cost-effective way and, more importantly, to
ensure that _no one is left behind_.

While preparing to discuss with the world the advantages and challenges of using
administrative data sources for the production of statistics, we remind
ourselves that administrative registers are there to organize the information
needed by those who are politically and practically responsible for the
provision of crucial public goods (be it education, health, or social safety
nets), and to help ensure good governance. The fact that data from
administrative registers can also be used for the production of statistics is
just an "add-on", and not their primary function.

We look forward to share at the UN World Data Forum the very detailed ways how
we actually can rely on administrative records to obtain extremely valuable
statistical information, combining data from different admin sources into an
integrated system of statistics that makes it possible, for instance, to derive
very specific knowledge about the labor market position of every individual in
our country. As another example, we will see how it is possible to have an
education register that follows every student on his or her way through the
educational system. On top of this, we look forward to show how we are sharing
our data with researchers and analysts in ministries and organization for them
to do detailed analysis on specific areas of our society.

For us, it all started back in the 1960s and was developed through the 1970s--at
a time were advancements in information technology were not as widespread as
they are now. We are sure that there many important lessons to learn from each
other in our common quest for better data that can help us achieve the
[Sustainable Development Goals](https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs).
