---
title: 'SDG monitoring: data from civil society'
date: 2018-10-01
authors:
  - hermanus-rietveld
  - lieneke-hoeksma
---

In March 2018, [Statistics Netherlands (CBS)](https://www.cbs.nl/en-gb) released
its second SDG report,
[The sustainable development goals: the situation for the Netherlands](https://www.cbs.nl/en-gb/publication/2018/10/the-sdgs-the-situation-for-the-netherlandshttps:/www.cbs.nl/en-gb/publication/2018/10/the-sdgs-the-situation-for-the-netherlands)',
with data for 51 percent of the international SDG indicators, up from 33 percent
in the first report. This leap - from just over one third to over half of the
indicators - was the result of including data from civil society. This blog
explains how we did this, and our experience can hopefully further the
discussions at the [2018 United Nations World Data Forum](//undataforum.org/),
taking place 22-24 October 2018 in Dubai, on how data from civil society can be
incorporated into national official statistics. These are our most important
experiences and take-aways.

## Prelude

In 2016, CBS made an in-house inventory of the available SDG information for the
Netherlands. This resulted in its first
[report](https://www.cbs.nl/en-gb/publication/2016/44/measuring-the-sdgs-an-initial-picture-for-the-netherlands).
CBS was the first statistical institute in the world to report a baseline
measurement of the SDGs, and the initiative received widespread international
attention. During the opening ceremony of the first World Data Forum in Cape
Town, for example, CBS was cited as an example for other countries precisely
because of this SDG work.

The first report contained all the data we had within CBS, and to expand the
data for the second report, we needed to look elsewhere. We decided to organize
an extensive consultation of over thirty organisations, including ministries,
policy analysis institutes, knowledge institutions and NGOs. The purpose of this
exercise was to pinpoint the "low-hanging fruit": usable SDG information
available within civil society. This _multi-stakeholder data collaboration
between public and private sectors_ resulted in 34 additional indicators,
raising the total proportion of indicators covered to 51 percent.

## Action plan for external consultation

So how did we tackle this? Before organizing the actual consultation, we needed
to draft an unambiguous and transparent quality assessment framework. Like our
own data from Statistics Netherlands, data from other providers must comply with
a number of conditions. To assess whether the quality of these external data was
high enough to include them as an input for the SDG indicators, a framework was
developed by which potentially available data can be tested.

We didn't have to reinvent the wheel for this; we based it on our own CBS
quality guidelines and those compiled by
[Eurostat](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat) and the
[OECD](https://www.oecd.org/unitedstates/), and we consulted other national
statistical offices that had similar experiences.

Having put this in place, we then looked at what data we needed to collect: the
gaps in our baseline report. However, we did not want to limit ourselves to this
because we also wanted to improve and refine indicators included in the first
report, where possible. The next step was to think about which organizations
could provide these missing data. Together with our internal experts who have
wide ranging external contacts - and the relevant account managers - we drew up
a list of over 30 ministries, agencies, universities, research institutes and
NGOs that we thought would have relevant data.

The ministries already had an active collective SDG focal point group, whose
members - one contact point per ministry - we used as an entry point. For other
organizations, we asked our account managers and other colleagues within CBS if
they had a contact person. For the few remaining organizations where we had no
name, we used personal networks, or, in some cases,
[Google](https://google.com). At this point we had a list of organizations, and
for each organization a contact person. We sent these contacts an e-mail and
asked them if they could point us towards the person most likely to have
information on SDGs. Once we had that name, we used this person as our single
point of contact.

What did we ask them to do? We sent them spreadsheets with the SDG indicators
relevant to their field of work, with the gaps marked, and we asked them whether
they:

1. had data to fill the gaps,
2. could suggest other organizations that may have data, and
3. could suggest data that could be used as a proxy for the officially required
   indicators.

In this stage of the process, we had frequent contact, by e-mail, telephone and
face-to-face. In general, the organizations were pleased to be consulted, and
many had their own ideas about indicators better suited to the Dutch situation
than the global indicators. This was nice, but not what we needed. Our goal was
to increase the coverage of the official global indicators and we often had to
steer them back in this direction.

Having convinced them of this, we received usable data from over 20
organizations, and managed to increase our indicator coverage from 33 percent to
51 percent.

## Tips and tricks

As described above, our experience with incorporating data from civil society
organizations in SDG monitoring is positive. We are convinced that other
countries can benefit from this exercise, and that's why we want to share this
information with you. If you are interested, we can provide you with tips and
tricks from our own experience. From our perspective, the two most important
steps are: make sure you select the right organizations and keep your selection
criteria transparent. These organizations invest time and money to help you, so
it's very important that they (and others) understand why data are included -or
not included - in the national SDG dataset.

## Next steps

As mentioned above, most of the low-hanging SDG fruit has now been picked in the
Netherlands. One of our next steps will be looking at innovative new data
sources for our SDG monitoring. Alongside surveys and registers, we are set to
explore the possibilities of big data, including city data, satellite data,
social media, real-time data from sensors and cellular data. In addition, CBS is
also looking at possibilities to expand its SDG activities to include the
corporate sector, international support, and regional and city data.
