---
title: The need for open and accessible data
date: 2016-11-17
authors:
  - sanjay-kumar
images:
  - ../assets/posts/open-accessible-data-image.jpg
---

import { Image } from '@undataforum/gatsby-theme-blog';

­Data and information are the key to the ‘digital age’ we live in today.
Availability, accessibility, and utility of information are both testimonials
and benchmark of human development of societies and nations in terms of societal
engagement, inclusive policies, citizen empowerment, and economic advancement.
‘Knowledge economy’ and ‘digital World’ are now the determining axes around
which civilizations and nations revolve and evolve. Scientific and technological
infrastructure, which enables innovation and creates knowledge entrepreneurs and
professionals, is the bedrock of progressive societies.

Participatory democracy through citizen engagements in overall strategy and
implementation at regional and local levels is emerging as a new norm of
integrated and inclusive governance and development, enhancing equity of
multiple stakeholders in the process. In this context, co-ownership of national
values, programs and policies, principles and guidelines, and security, is
pre-requisite for a mature and participatory democracy.

Data and information are two distinct but very naturally connected and
interdependent terms, as both enable analytics-based decision making and project
monitoring systems. In fact, the quality and authenticity of the data being
collected on various aspects of social, economic and political values and
natural resources are the key ingredients of our information infrastructure, so
it can offer a knowledge platform for all stakeholders to design and implement
development-oriented policies and programs.

And since the information derived is based on data, it is very important to have
qualitative, updated, authentic data about every relevant entity, people, and
resources. At the same time, it is equally important to share and make available
those datasets to various stakeholders to bring in cohesive and coordinated
implemented and monitoring mechanisms.

<Image
  fluid={props.images[0]}
  title="The need for open and accessible data"
  alt="The need for open and accessible data"
/>

Development, advancement and transformation of societies and economies largely
depend on the relevance and smartness of policies and programs, and on the
adequate monitoring of their implementation. Modern technology innovations and
information systems make data even more meaningful and dynamic, and encourage
open data, open systems, open government and open monitoring. Data is not only
being collected for planning purposes but it also helps in overall monitoring of
development projects, empowering public participation and transparency in
overall process.

While data evolves into information, and lays the foundation for public policies
and plans, analytics brings forward the right tools and knowledge to better view
and understand data in a connected and integrated manner. It offers analysis and
modelling capabilities to support policies and programs, and enables mid-term
corrections by incorporating experiences and feedbacks through peoples’
participation.

As we progress towards digital civilization, our appetite for data would grow
much more every day, making it almost the pre-requisite for every human endeavor
and action. The United Nations World Data Forum is a very appropriate platform
to collectively think together about evolving dimensions and dynamics of data,
information, and analytics, and make use of the same in most appropriate manner
to improve quality of life worldwide.
