---
title:
  'The United Nations World Data Forum 2020 - Bringing together data producers
  and users in Bern'
date: 2020-01-27
authors:
  - gabriella-vukovich
---

With the beginning of the New Year, it is less than nine months until we gather
in Bern, Switzerland for the UNWDF 2020.

I am very excited to be part of the process of planning for the third Forum
which will harness the power of data and statistics for the data revolution that
has been the underlying theme of the United Nations World Data Forum. At this
third edition of the forum, we will focus on highlighting innovations and new
initiatives in bridging the data gaps, addressing the unmet need for financing
for data and statistics, and building concrete solutions and outcomes to
modernize national statistical systems.

The UNWDF 2020 continues the mission started in Cape Town in 2017, followed by
the event in Dubai in 2018 to bring together experts and data advocates,
politicians and civil society representatives, statisticians and data
scientists, to discuss data innovations and partnerships. The purpose is to
address the changing data demands, which result from the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The Forum will bring together data experts from the
larger data landscape, national statisticians, policy makers and other data
users to learn from each other and share key developments to enhance data
availability, use and impact at the national and global levels.

As a chief statistician, a member and former co-chair of the High Level Group
for Partnership, Coordination and Capacity Building for statistics for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the Chair of the Programme Committee for
the UNWDF 2020, I see the UNWDF 2020 as a place to reinforce the political
commitment to the 2030 Agenda and to strengthen the partnerships needed to
support more and better data and statistics. This is a crucial time for data and
statistics. We must work to build trust in the national statistical systems. The
UNWDF 2020 offers an opportunity to build on the discussions held at the
previous two fora and to reiterate the importance of strong and independent
national statistical offices, while also providing ample space to discuss how
best to integrate new and innovative data sources to respond to the data demands
of today’s societies.

Through the
[six thematic areas of the forum](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/undataforum/programme/index.html),
participants will have the opportunity to share their experiences and engage in
discussions in a variety of interactive formats. The importance of more and
better financing for data and statistics and the response of the donor community
will be an important topic at the forum.

An
[open call for proposals](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/undataforum/call-for-session-proposals-for-united-nations-world-data-forum-2020/)
was launched at the beginning of December on the forum’s website to gather the
most interesting and dynamic inputs for the forum’s programme. We are seeking
proposals that engage multiple stakeholders, expand the knowledge base and widen
the perspective of forum participants through showcasing innovative,
action-oriented solutions to the most pressing data challenges. By highlighting
best practices and innovative ideas, the forum will contribute to evidence-based
policymaking to ensure the global community reaches the ambitions set out in the
2030 Agenda and can measure progress along the way. Answers to frequently asked
questions on the open call for proposals can be found
[here](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/undataforum/call-for-session-proposals-for-united-nations-world-data-forum-2020/UNWDF2020_Call_for_Sessions_FAQs.pdf)
and additional guidelines for submitting your proposal is available
[here](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/undataforum/call-for-session-proposals-for-united-nations-world-data-forum-2020/UNWDF2020_ProposalGuidelines.pdf).

If you intend to submit a proposal you have until the end of this week when the
call closes. Simply register your proposal
[here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSeB4uJIOHxonEgqKFJ7GBYFyrNaTWb1E9lwloS8d9zGNBgafg/viewform).

I also encourage you to join the ongoing UNWDF webinar series which provides
opportunities for all to participate in discussions to further the dialogue
started in Cape Town and Dubai and to actively participate in the webinar
series.

I invite you to be engaged before, during and after the Forum to promote
solutions for more and better data for sustainable development.

Hope to see you in Bern in October 2020!
