---
title: Why a World Data Forum?
date: 2016-12-12
authors:
  - claire-melamed
---

My first experience of data collection was running a survey in a small, isolated
village in Northern Mozambique in the late 1990s as part of my academic
research. I collected and analysed the data, and when I had finished with it, I
put the 400 or so paper surveys in boxes (which I still have!) and put them in a
cupboard. That was fairly typical for the times--a world where the collectors
and users of data were the same, and where data sharing and re-use were the
exception, not the rule.

Everything has changed since then. We live in a world where a huge amount of
data is now collected by machines – and where the collectors of the data, the
mobile phone companies or owners of satellites, are often not the users of the
data they collect. And where data has most value when it is open, and can be
re-used over and over again, or combined with other data through the magic of
digital programing.

My most recent experience of data collection was being part of a team that
created a global survey run by the
[United Nations Development Programme](https://www.undp.org/). We collected
responses from 10 million people on paper, online and by mobile phones – the
data is all available online, and has been used by thousands of academics,
governments and civil society organisations and combined with hundreds of other
datasets – including household surveys and data from twitter – to produce more
insights and impact than could possibly have been achieved by the small team
running the project.

This shift, as I have learned in my working life, means that it is literally
impossible to take up the new opportunities of data without finding new ways to
bring the very different producers and the users of data together.

The data revolution is all about connections. I see what these connections can
do every day through the work of the
[Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data (GPSDD)](http://www.data4sdgs.org/).
When I sit round a table in Dakar, Senegal with government officials, private
sector partners and civil society, and hear how they are working together to
ensure that all the benefits of the data revolution are brought to bear to
deliver sustainable development in that country. When I sit in a café in London
and hear how a data scientist is developing a model to predict malaria outbreaks
in Zambia. And when I hear, on a Skype call from Bogotá, Colombia, how mobile
phone companies, programmers and developers are working with governments,
academics and civil society organisations across Latin America to gather
insights from over 1,000 different datasets that can help to monitor and achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.

But I am also very aware that making this happen is not easy. In this new
landscape the producers, analysts and users of data come from different
sectors--private and public, civil society and academic. They operate within
different boundaries--national governments, international agencies, global
companies, city authorities and district level NGOs. They have different
incentives – political, commercial, social and professional.

We know what is possible now, and thanks to the work of innovators all over the
world, are starting to understand the benefits that the data revolution can
deliver. But making it happen, worldwide, and making sure that everyone can
benefit, is as much a political as a technical challenge. Working out how to
combine datasets to produce insights that are methodologically rigorous and
usable in different contexts is one thing. Creating the legal, regulatory and
political frameworks, and making the investments in human and technical
resources that make it possible to use those insights at scale is quite another.

The United Nations World Data Forum is coming at exactly the right moment. The
technical possibilities are dazzling. But the political and economic questions
that need to be answered if essential collaborations are to happen, are only
just beginning. A United Nations forum, bringing together governments,
companies, United Nations agencies and global networks like the GPSDD, is just
the place to begin those conversations. I, for one, cannot wait.
